CASMTRIAGE-3625: Update console node evacuation procedure (#1955)
Cray-HPE/docs-csm: operations/conman/Establish_a_Serial_Connection_to_NCNs.md

# Establish a Serial Connection to NCNs

The ConMan pod can be used to establish a serial console connection with each non-compute node (NCN) in the system.

In the scenario of a power down or reboot of an NCN worker, one must first determine if any `cray-console` pods

> are running on that NCN. It is important to move `cray-console` pods to other worker nodes before rebooting or

Reviewer: At the end of this sentence you may want to add "... powering off a worker node to minimize disruption in console logging."

powering off a worker node.

If a `cray-console-node` pod is running on a worker node when it is powered off or rebooted, then access to its
associated consoles will be unavailable until one of the following things happens:

* the worker node comes back up and the `cray-console-node` pod begins running on it.
* the `cray-console-node` pod is terminated and comes up on another worker node.
* the `cray-console-operator` pod assigns the associated consoles to a different `cray-console-node` pod.

## Prerequisites

The user performing these procedures needs to have access permission to the `cray-console-operator` and `cray-console-node` pods.

## Connection procedure

1. When trying to monitor a worker node that will be rebooted or powered down, first follow the
   [Evacuation procedure](#evacuation-procedure).

1. (`ncn-mw#`) Find the `cray-console-node` pod that is connecting with the console.

    ```bash

>     NODE_POD=$(kubectl -n services exec $OP_POD -c cray-console-operator -- sh -c \

Reviewer: This uses 'OP_POD', but it looks like you removed the directions to get it defined?

Author: Fixed

        "/app/get-node $XNAME" | jq .podname | sed 's/"//g')
    echo $NODE_POD
    ```

    Example output:

    ```text
    cray-console-node-1
    ```

1. (`ncn-mw#`) Establish a serial console session with the desired NCN.

    ```bash

>     kubectl -n services exec -it $NOD_EPOD -- conman -j $XNAME

Reviewer: Typo 'NOD_EPOD'

Author: Fixed

    ```

>     The console session log files for each NCN are located in a shared volume in the `cray-console-operator` and `cray-console-node` pods.

Reviewer: Slight forward-looking change - can you remove the 'cray-console-operator' option here?  Upcoming Mercury changes will remove the share from the operator pod so we may as well get them used to looking in one of the node pods now...

1. Exit the connection to the console by entering `&.`.

## Evacuation procedure

In order to avoid losing data while monitoring a reboot or power down of a worker node,
first follow this procedure to evacuate the target worker node of its pods.

1. (`ncn-mw#`) Set the `WNODE` variable to the name of the worker node being evacuated.

    Modify the following example to reflect the actual worker node number.

    ```bash
    WNODE=ncn-wxxx
    ```

1. (`ncn-mw#`) Cordon the node so that rescheduled pods do not end up back on the same node.

    ```bash
    kubectl cordon $WNODE
    ```

1. (`ncn-mw#`) Find all `cray-console` pods that need to be migrated.

    This includes `cray-console-node`, `cray-console-data` (but not its Postgres pods), and `cray-console-operator`.

    ```bash
    kubectl get pods -n services -l 'app.kubernetes.io/name in (cray-console-node, cray-console-data, cray-console-operator)' \
      --field-selector spec.nodeName=$WNODE | awk '{print $1}'
    ```

    Example output:

    ```text
    cray-console-operator-6cf89ff566-kfnjr
    ```

> 1. (`ncn-mw#`) Delete any `cray-console-operator` or `cray-console-data` pods listed in the previous step.

Reviewer: 'and'?

Author: fixed

    If none were listed, then skip this step.

    1. Delete the pods.

        ```bash
        for POD in $(kubectl get pods -n services -l 'app.kubernetes.io/name in (cray-console-data, cray-console-operator)' \
          --field-selector spec.nodeName=$WNODE | awk '{print $1}'); do
                kubectl -n services delete pod $POD
        done
        ```

    1. Wait for the `console-operator` and `console-data` pods to be re-scheduled on other nodes.

        Run the following command until both deployments show `1/1` pods are ready.

        ```bash
        kubectl -n services get deployment | grep cray-console
        ```

        Example output:

        ```text

>         cray-console-data           1/1     1          1     103d

Reviewer: Minor point - if these are newly moved they won't have a lifetime of 103d...

Author: Good point. Fixed

Reviewer 2: Did you push up your changes? They don't seem to be showing up for me.

## Prerequisites

The user performing these procedures needs to have access permission to the `cray-console-operator` and `cray-console-node` pods.

> ## Connection Procedure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Connection procedure
```

> 1. When trying to monitor a worker node that will be rebooted or powered-down,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. When trying to monitor a worker node that will be rebooted or powered down,
```

first follow the evacuation procedure.

> 1. Find the `cray-console-node` pod that is connecting with the console.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. (`ncn-mw#`) Find the `cray-console-node` pod that is connecting with the console.
```

    Example output:

    ```text
    cray-console-node-1
    ```

1. (`ncn-mw#`) Establish a serial console session with the desired NCN.

    ```bash
    kubectl -n services exec -it $NOD_EPOD -- conman -j $XNAME
    ```

    The console session log files for each NCN are located in a shared volume in the `cray-console-operator` and `cray-console-node` pods.
    In those pods, the log files are in the `/var/log/conman/` directory and are named `console.<xname>`.

    **IMPORTANT:** If the `cray-console-node` pod the user is connected through is running on the same NCN that the console session is connected to,
    and a reboot of that same NCN is initiated, then expect the connection to terminate and there to be a gap in the console log file.
    The gap will last until the console connection is reestablished through a different `cray-console-node` pod or until the existing pod is restarted on a different NCN.
    If the `cray-console-node` pod was running on a different NCN or was moved prior to the reboot, then the console log and session should persist through the operation.

1. Exit the connection to the console by entering `&.`.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

    Example output:

    ```text
    cray-console-node-1
    ```

1. Establish a serial console session (from `ncn-m001`) with the desired NCN.

    ```bash
    kubectl -n services exec -it $NOD_EPOD -- conman -j $XNAME
    ```

>     The console session log files for each NCN is located in the `cray-console-operator` and `cray-console-node` pods in a shared volume at the `/var/log/conman/` directory in a file named `console.<xname>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The console session log files for each NCN are located in a shared volume in the `cray-console-operator` and `cray-console-node` pods.
    In those pods, the log files are in the `/var/log/conman/` directory and are named `console.<xname>`.
```

1.  Exit the connection to the console with the `&.` command.

## Evacuation Procedure

Too avoid losing data while monitoring a reboot or power-down of a worker node,
first follow this procedure to evacuate all from the target worker node.

1. Cordon the node so that rescheduled pods don't end up back on the same node.

        ```bash
        kubectl cordon $WNODE
        ```
        
1. Find all `cray-console` pods that need to be migrated.  This includes `console-node`,
`console-data` (but not postres), and `console-operator`. 

    ```bash
    kubectl get pods -n services -l 'app.kubernetes.io/name in (cray-console-node, cray-console-data, cray-console-operator)'  --field-selector spec.nodeName=$WNODE | awk '{print $1}'
    ```
   
    Example output:
    ```text
    cray-console-operator-6cf89ff566-kfnjr
    ```
   

> 1. If there were `cray-console-operator` or `cray-console-data` pods listed in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. (`ncn-mw#`) If there were `cray-console-operator` or `cray-console-data` pods listed in the
```

previous step, delete those pods.

    ```bash
    for POD in $(kubectl get pods -n services -l 'app.kubernetes.io/name in (cray-console-data, cray-console-operator)'  --field-selector spec.nodeName=$WNODE | awk '{print $1}')
    do
      kubectl -n services delete pod $POD
    done
    ```

> 1. Wait for the `console-operator` and `console-data` pods to be re-scheduled on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. (`ncn-mw#`) Wait for the `console-operator` and `console-data` pods to be re-scheduled on other nodes.
```

> other nodes.  Run the following command until both deployments show `1/1` pods are ready.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

    Run the following command until both deployments show `1/1` pods are ready.
```

    ```bash
    kubectl -n services get deployment | grep cray-console
    ```
   
   Example output:

>     ```bash

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion

    ```text
````

    cray-console-data           1/1     1          1     103d
    cray-console-operator       1/1     1          1     103d
    ```
   

> 1. Once the `console-operator` and `console-data` pods are up, if there were

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. (`ncn-mw#`) Once the `console-operator` and `console-data` pods are up, if there were
```

`cray-console-node` pods listed in the earlier step, delete those pods.

    ```bash
    for POD in $(kubectl get pods -n services -l 'app.kubernetes.io/name=cray-console-node'  --field-selector spec.nodeName=$WNODE | awk '{print $1}')
    do
      kubectl -n services delete pod $POD
    done
    ```

> 1. Wait for the `console-node` pods to be re-scheduled on other nodes.  Run the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. (`ncn-mw#`) Wait for the `console-node` pods to be re-scheduled on other nodes.
```

> following command until all pods show ready.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

    Run the following command until all pods show ready.
```

    ```bash
    kubectl -n services get statefulset cray-console-node
    ```
   
   Example output:

>     ```bash

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion

    ```text
````

    NAME                READY   AGE
    cray-console-node   2/2     161d
    ```
    

> 1. After the node has been rebooted and can accept `cray-console` pods again,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. (`ncn-mw#`) After the node has been rebooted and can accept `cray-console` pods again,
```

uncordon the node.

>         ```bash

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ```bash
```

>         kubectl uncordon $WNODE

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    kubectl uncordon $WNODE
```

>         ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ```
```

    Example output:

    ```text
    cray-console-node-1
    ```

1. (`ncn-mw#`) Establish a serial console session with the desired NCN.

    ```bash

>     kubectl -n services exec -it $NOD_POD -- conman -j $XNAME

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    kubectl -n services exec -it $NODE_POD -- conman -j $XNAME
```
